# Game Cube Power PC To C++
A WIP GameCube Power PC to C++ static transcompiler.

Started as a project for renaming DTK output, turned into a attempt at turning DTK outputed assembly to C++, then to PC Ports.

# Deps

- Python: Used for Stage 0 where we execute DTK stuff

- Ninja: Used for Stage 0 where we execute DTK stuff

Both will need to be on your Path. Besides theses PPC is entirly self contained.

# Useage

PPC provides a helpfull help help-y screen if you run `PPC.exe` with no arguments. We reccomanded using that for most up to date.

But here's some basic useage

- `PPC.exe -rom <filepathToROM> -output <dirToOutputPPCStuffTo>`: This will tell PPC to start the GC ROM to PC Port pipeline for the supplied ROM.

- `PPC.exe -extract <filepathToROM> -output <dirToOutputROMContents>`: This will tell PPC to extract the ROM's contents to the desired folder. Leverages DTK under the hood.

- `PPC.exe -decompile <filepathToROM> -output <dirToOutputROMContents>`: This will tell PPC to run the entire Stage 0 and basically produce a entire DTK project along with Assembly. If you need a DTK project here ya go.

# Building

IGNORE EVERYTHING BELOW, THAT'S FROM PPCC, THE OLD VERSION OF THIS TOOL

PPC has three functions

- Assembly generation and program analysis: This is where a ROM is decompiled. Then analyzed to generate a graph of program flow and what structs are.

- Sudo C++ Generation: This is where the program graph is converted to sudo C++, simmilar to Ghidria.

- PC Port Compalation: This is where the program is instead of converting directly to C++. Each Assembly instruction is converted into a C++ macro function via the Static Recomp Layer. This allows the program to run on PC and interact with the Seafoam Renderer.

PPC has eight stages

- Stage 0: This is where the ROM is ripped apart and decompiled using DTK.

- Stage 1: The symbol data is scanned and Assembly is lexed into tokens. Generating the first set of metadata about each file.

- Stage 2: Structs are renamed based on what's inside of them and their member variables.

- Stage 3: Functions are analyzed and their ASM instructions are turned into AST trees for each function.

- Stage 4: Structs and what variables are used inside functions are resolved.

- Stage 5: Functions 

PPC is made of several programs

- [DTK]() this was not developed by Jas or Jinxy. It was made by Encounter for decompiling Game Cube and Wii games.

- Power PC Lexer: This is the main lexer for turning DTK outputted Assembly into tokens and generating the extra metadata needed.

- Power PC Static Layer: This is the layer that handles the C++ implemntation of Power PC Opcodes on PC.

- Seafoam: This is the custom rendering engine made for the PC Ports generated by PPC.

- Chameleon Compiler: This is a custom compiler that allows languages to be translated between each other via a unified AST.

There are two programs `PPCC - Power PC C++ Compiler` and `Struct Rename`

# PPCC

Power PC C++ Compiler is the namespake of the project. It takes DTK outputed assembly and converts it to C++. Each ASM file becomes a header and source C++ file. Each instruction is replaced with a C++ "macro" function that handles the implementation of the instruction.

# Struct Renaming

Struct renaming handles the process of sifting through the ASM and symbol file. Then from there renaming objects in the ASM based on their varibles inside.

### Naming Scheme

All `lbl_` objects get found and have a name generated for them and the count appended to the end.

If a object contains only .floats(s) the object will be renamed `LBL_STRUCT_FLOAT_XXX`.

If a object contains only .skip(s) the object will be renamed `LBL_STRUCT_SPACE_RESERVE_SKIP_XXX`.

If a object contains only .double(s) the object will be renamed `LBL_STRUCT_DOUBLE_XXX`.

If a object contains only .byte(s) the object will be renamed `LBL_STRUCT_BYTE_XXX`.

If a object contains only .byte4(s) the object will be renamed `LBL_STRUCT_BYTE4_XXX`.

The fallback incase a object has a mix of types or can't be deducated. The struct will be called `LBL_STRUCT_XXX`.

## PPCC Useage

In order to run PCASMToCpp.exe, it requires a few file paths.

```
-asm <path> || the directory path to the folder containing your decompiled assembly. Normally found in the build folder after DTK does it's thing.

-cout <path> || The directory where C++ code will be outputted to

```

## Struct Renaming Useage

In order to run StructRename.exe, it requires a few file paths.

```
-asm <path> || the directory path to the folder containing your decompiled assembly. Normally found in the build folder after DTK does it's thing.

-symbolFile <path> || The full path to the symbols.txt file where DTK outputs it's symbols.

```

Struct Rename will run and spit out in the console what objects it is renaming.

## Credits

- Jinxy <br>
Handled the first macro function implementation and provided details on how some datatypes match to C++

- Jas <br>
Handled the compiler that lexes DTK and outputs C++ macro functions.

## How the Transcompiler works?

For the sake of a clean README it has been moved to their own READMEs.

- [PPCC Stages](README_DOCS/PPPCDetails.md)
- [Struct Renamer]()
- [PPCC AST Trees and Passes]()

## How to build?

If you want a compiled binary, head to [Releases](https://github.com/SeanMott/PPCC/releases). If you actually want to build it, you're in the right place.

### Any Platform

PPCC depends on the [Bytes The Dust Standard Library](). This is a library of C++ code used in BTD projects. A python installer script will run you through set up.

[Python]() is required for build set up and DTK, but PPCC itself doesn't need it.

### Windows

In the `PythonScripts` folder run `PPCCProjectSetup.py`, the installer will walk you through getting BTDSTD if needed and update the Premake script to work on your system.

Afterwards run `GenProjects.bat` and then just open and build the visual studio project.

### Mac

### Linux